Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lob. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Edward Hall. He is
Norman Eve Willem, Professor of Philosophy at Harvard University.
He works on a range of topics in metaphysics
and epistemology that overlap with philosophy of science. And
today we're focusing mostly on the philosophy of causation
and we'll talk a little bit about some aspects
of the nature of reality that might overlap with
the philosophy of causation. So, Doctor Hall, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Oh, thank you very much for having me. I'm
delighted to be here.
OK. So how do you approach the issue of
causation from a philosophical perspective, particularly from the perspective
of philosophy of science? What is causation exactly?
Oh, so let me separate the question of how
I approach the topic and, and the much harder
question of what causation is. Um So I'll, I'll
put this in a little bit of kind of
autobiographical context. I used to approach the study of
causation in a way that I learned from my,
one of my teachers, David Lewis, which was to
take it that the main task for us as
philosophers is to come up with some kind of
informative analysis of causation. That's kind of a way
of filling in the blanks. Um In the following
equation X causes why if and only if blank,
no. And David Lewis famously uh defended a kind
of way of filling in those blanks that that
appealed to counterfactual. So the very simplest version of
the kind of theory or analysis that he endorsed
was X causes why if and only if if
X had not occurred, why would not have occurred.
And we might add just to for clarity, X
and Y both do in fact occur. So Susie
throws a rock at a window, the window breaks.
What does it mean to say that her throat
caused the window to break? It's to say first,
she threw the rock, second, the window broke and
third, and this is the crucial element. If she
hadn't thrown the rock, the window wouldn't have broken.
Um That wasn't Lewis's preferred analysis. He added some
complexity to it, but it gives you the flavor.
Um And one of the things to emphasize is
that for Lewis, the way to proceed was to
construct analyses like this and then test them against
our intuitively held judgments about cases. So for example,
the analysis I just gave you looks like it
runs into trouble if we um just think of
the right kinds of cases. Suppose Suzie and Billy
are both throwing rocks at the same window, but
Susie is a little faster. So it's her rock
that hits the window, whereas Billy's was just a
split second too late. So it's intuitively still the
case that her throat caused the window to break.
And yet if she hadn't thrown the window would
have broken all the same. Thanks to thanks to
the backup. And so this gives you a kind
of capsule summary, a kind of illustration of a
way of proceeding here. Philosophically, you propose an analysis,
you come up with cases that make trouble, you
go back and revise the analysis or maybe try
something different. And quite a lot of work on
causation in the last I think 50 years has
that flavor kind of proposal and counterexample drawing heavily
on our, on our intuitive reactions to cases. And
I've come to think that a different way of
proceeding is much more helpful. And it's one where
I've been inspired by the work of, of James
Woodward on causation, where, where we should step back
and ask what having a concept of causation or
more generally, what thinking about the world in causal
terms does for us? Why is this a valuable
thing? Yeah. Um And for me, one way to
focus this is to, is, is to start with
what looks like a kind of like obvious truth,
like maybe even trivial truth about the sciences, which
is the sciences. Aim to discover and articulate the
causal structure of the world. Um THAT can seem
obvious. Um But if we approach that question in
the way Woodward recommends we should ask like, well,
what is causation need to mean in order for
this to be a useful characterization of what's important
in science? And, and then no, that's, that gets
very complicated. Uh We need to think about like,
well, what are the different kinds of value that
causal thinking in causal terms can have for us?
And I don't have a settled view about that.
I think, I, I think Woodward's own view, which
is that we think in causal terms because we're
very concerned, not merely to passively record what goes
on around us and passively predict it, but to
intervene and navigate and control and manipulate, that's, that's
important and causal concepts helps observe that. But I
think a lot of the way we think about
causation is also structured by the need to have
a kind of organized view of the world. Um
So I think that it's a very deep seated
part of the way we humans think about causal
structure that we look for connecting processes. And so
if I go back to the Suzie and Billy,
both throwing rocks at the window example and ask
like, well, what are we focusing on when we
immediately judge in the case where they're both throwing
that? It's Susie's throw that causes the window break
to break and not Billy's, we're focusing on a
very characteristic kind of process that links her throat
to the windows breaking. It just consists of a
rock flying through the air and making contact. And,
and this is something II I do not have
again, a settled view about, but I think one
way or another, that notion of process is really
important to us. And so when I come back
to your question, what is causation? I tend to
want to rewrite that question and, and pose it
as like what are the most helpful, functional, useful
ways to think about the world in causal terms?
And now things are gonna are gonna get very
hand wavy very fast. I think that it's got
to be some combination of thinking about the world
in terms as divided up into separately identifiable processes.
But where those processes also have something, some interesting
kind of dependent structure to them. No, like the
the fact that a rock flying through the window,
sorry through the air and and striking window appears
to us as an important process is partly because
that kind of process has a lot of internal
connections. No earlier stages. Um SORRY, later stages of
it depend on earlier stages. The final stage depends
on initial stages, at least when nothing in the
environment like in another throw, you know, from another
vandal like Billy is going on to mask that
dependency. Um So, so in earlier work of mine,
II I sort of ambitiously thought, well, we just
have two distinct concepts of causation. There's a kind
of concept that is just captured by this notion
of dependence. And then there's a concept that I
called production, which is somehow captured by the notion
of connecting process. And I now think it's not
that simple, that both of these strands in our
thinking are very, very important. But how exactly we
knit them together is a complicated matter. So that
was a long answer, Ricardo. But hopefully that can
no, I understand this is a very complicated subject.
Uh But I mean, here just to make things
clearer because we are approaching things from the perspective
of philosophy of science. And I mean, just thinking
about science and looking for example, across the several
different disciplines from physics, chemistry to geology, biology and
the social sciences. I mean, ii I have perhaps
two questions I want to ask you. I mean,
is it that what you're trying to do here
as a philosopher is trying to understand um causality
uh as it works across all different fields, all
different areas and in all different kinds of circumstances,
I mean, basically have a, an overall framework as
to how we can determine that something caused another
or a couple of things caused uh uh uh
something else, whatever or uh for example, uh I'm
asking you this because of course, if we look
across the several different scientific disciplines, it seems that
the way we determine that something caused another uh
is different. So for example, if we look at
physics, the way we determine that something caused another,
there, it seems very different or it seems I
might be wrong, but it seems very different from
the way we determine that uh I mean, the
cause of a particular behavior of a human or
another animal. In, for example, biology, psychology, I mean,
iii I in a very simplistic way, I guess
it would seem that things become more and more
complicated as we move through levels of analysis. So
again, going back to the question, I was trying
to ask you, are you trying to come up
with the a universal framework to determine causation, whatever
kind of scientific discipline we're talking about? Or do
you think that we should understand causation depending on
the object of study or the question we are
trying to answer?
I think it's a great question. I will say
my own ambition, which I recognize is absurd is
to come up with a universal account. It's exactly
to do that. But at the same time, it's
obvious that there are differences between the fields and
in how they, you know, just the methodologies for
trying to figure out what causes what and, and
maybe even for um but in some loose sense,
they, they mean by causation now, I, I wanted
to say that's a loose sense. II I think
part part of the reason I have this kind
of absurd ambition is I, I don't think it's
just some weird linguistic accident that we use the
same term so fluently in so many different areas.
Um, um, I mean, it might be, no, it,
it might be that at the end of the
day we should just think that social scientists should
use a different word from physicists and they should
use a different word from biologists And we'd all
do a much better job of not confusing each
other if we sort of jettison the single word
cause. But, but I, I don't think that's right.
Um Now, that's just a hunch, it's a working
hypothesis. Um um But it, it may be that
in order to fulfill that ambition of having a
universal theory, we, we need an approach that recognizes
that there are gonna be a number of different
parameters to pay attention to and in some fields,
those parameters will have one setting and in another
field, they'll have a different setting and that will
make a comparatively superficial difference to how people talk
about causation, even though the underlying no structure of,
of thought is very similar. Um That's again a
working hypothesis. But I'll give you one example of
where I think that plays out sometimes in some
settings, we, we work with a, a fairly clear
understanding of normal conditions. And on the one hand,
and deviations from those conditions, on the other hand,
um So even in my little prosaic example of
Susie, throwing a rock at a window, you know,
throwing a rock is a deviation from something like
normal conditions where she just like sitting around or
the rock stays idle on the ground. No rock
being propelled through the air is a deviation from,
you know, what we might think of as like
the normal conditions for rock in those circumstances. Um
IN physics, it might be even clearer. And we,
the, the easiest examples from physics will take us
back to Newton. So they're a bit dated. But
the whole idea of a force um is under
conceptualized as something that's a deviation from a background
condition. The kind of default condition for an object
is to have no force on it. And by
default, we don't mean common. Now, Newton was perfectly
aware that most objects, maybe all objects at all
times have forces acting on them. But if you
think about how we set up his laws of
motion, the first law of motion is an object
not acted upon by a force moves with constant
velocity. And that, you know, that's a mathematically that
law is a trivial consequence of the second law
that says f equals ma force equals mass times
acceleration. Because if you know force is zero, then
by that equation acceleration is zero. So velocity is
constant. So why did he single out, you know
this one case as for special attention? Well, I
think it was to set it up a a
certain conceptual structure where we think of the world
when we have our Newtonian glasses on as a
world where the kind of the default no behavior,
the kind of behavior provided nothing is interfering of
any object is to just move with constant velocity.
And then of course, is a deviation from that.
And that can be very important in how we
think about causation. It already structures things a certain
way. It's natural when you have a really rich
conception of default versus de default states versus deviations
there from, to think of causes as things that
in the first instance, whatever else they are, they
need to be deviations. And it also helps with
understanding counterfactual. So in my example, and I said,
like if Susie hadn't thrown the rock at the
window, the window wouldn't have broken. This is the
original case where we don't have Pesky Billy in
the background trying to break it. At the same
time. You, you know, you and your listeners probably
heard that counterfactual thought. Yeah, that's obviously right. If
she hadn't thrown, no, nothing else was going to
do it. So it wouldn't have broken. But notice,
I didn't say when I asked you to entertain
that kind of counterfactual supposition, suppose she hadn't thrown,
then what would have happened? I didn't say, you
know, she was doing anything else. No. In fact,
I didn't specify much about what she's doing in
that kind of factual situation aside from the mere
fact that she's not throwing a rock. Well, who
knows, maybe she's running up and kicking the window
instead, but you didn't hear it that way. You
didn't hear it that way at all. What you,
you probably did is like, like said, well, some
kind of default state replaces the actual deviation where
she's throwing and, and the default state for the
rock in particular would be one where it's still
on the ground. No, and no other processes have
been set in motion that are aimed at the
wind, breaking the window. Ok? But it doesn't always
work like that. Like think about causation in our
mental lives. Suppose. Um um TRYING to think of
a good example. Um SUPPOSE I'm, you know, trying
to decide what to do and a bunch of
thoughts are running through my head and they lead
me to a certain conclusion and we ask like,
what would have happened if I hadn't? No drawing
that one inference I did at a certain step.
No, in my mental thought. Well, when you play
out examples like this, it might be that the
first thing that comes to mind is like, who
knows? Like there's no obvious like default status for
my mental life. No, to revert to in the
counterfactual situation. Um A maybe clear example of, of
how there can be no default is like, suppose
I ask like, suppose I had been, um, had
grown up to be taller than I in fact
am. So, I'm a little bit under 6 ft.
How tall would I have been? So, so I'll
ask you that, Ricardo. Like, what, what do you
think? Like, how should we answer a question like
that? I don't know. Exactly. Yeah. It's like, I
don't know, you know, 6 ft or above somewhere,
but it's indeterminate. We think, like, if I had
been taller, we don't think like there's any very
determinate story about how much taller it would have
been. And that's because there, there's no kind of
default setting for us to go to. So if,
if all I say is I'm not this tall.
No. Um THEN, then we're left, it's left wide
open how to fill in the details. Whereas very
often when we're using causal concepts and using counterfactual
to try to unpack them, it's not wide open
how to fill in the details. No. Um But
that's something that I think can vary between disciplines.
No. Um NO another, another parameter that can vary
is in some disciplines, there's a kind of natural
way to carve up any situation into different variables
that we can in principle, at least tweak or
toggle or very independently of one another. Um This
is like the idea of a controlled experiment if
I have some piece of the world and I'm
doing a controlled experiment, the first thought you have
maybe even without even noticing it is OK. There's
some variables that characterize the thing in a controlled
experiment consists in manipulating one or more of them
while holding the others fixed. OK. Um But in,
in the social settings, we can't always do that.
Um CONSIDER for example, how people dress what people's
biological, perceived, biological sexes and when whether people are
gender, non conforming. So this is an example I
learned from one of my phd students, she, she
asked you to imagine like Billy goes in for
a job interview and he's clearly presents as male.
Now, maybe has a beard and just his, his
physique would, um, and facial structure like would, would
immediately signal to anyone like, ok, he's male. Um,
BUT he's wearing a dress and makeup and carrying
a purse. Ok. And we might wonder if social
psychologists how he'll be received by the interviewer. Um
And offhand, there are three things that the interviewer
might be paying attention to his sex. No, that
like or, or might care about, say even have
biases about. It might be that the interviewer is
biased against males. It might be, the interview is
biased against people who wear dresses and makeup doesn't
matter whether they're male or female might be. The
interview is biased against people who dress in a
gender, non conforming way. They don't have a problem
with males. They don't have a problem with females.
They don't have a problem with wearing dresses, et
cetera, but it's got a match in their mind,
right. So here are three parameters, all of which
could causally matter his sex, his physical dress and
appearance, and whether he's gender conforming in his dress,
all this can matter. But notice you can't toggle
those independently of each other. There's no such thing
as a controlled experiment that isolates one of them
and holds and manipulates one of them while holding
the others fixed. And once you see this point,
this is due to Lily, who, who's now a
philosopher at Yale, you see this is like widespread
across the social world. You know, we have, we
regularly work with characteristics or parameters or variables that
we want to attribute some causal status to. But
where we can't think of them as like independently
manipulable. OK. So there's, there's a, there's a, there's
a sort of very specific way in which the
social sciences differ from other sciences where we can
analyze things in terms of independently manipulable variables. And
that's gonna make a difference to how we think
about causation. Um But going back to your original
point, it doesn't, to me at least immediately ruin
the the prospect of coming up with a universal
account. It just means a universal account has to
be flexible enough to sort of like know how
to apply in a case where you've got independently
manipulable variables and how to apply in a case
where you don't to know how to apply in
a case where you've got a clear distinction between
a default state and deviations there from and how
to apply in a case where you don't and
so on.
So let me ask you a different kind of
question. Now. Um What is the metaphysical status of
causation? I mean, is causation itself part of the
structure of reality or is it just the things
that have a cause or relation between themselves that
are part of reality?
That's a great, great question. I, I don't know
myself. I don't think any of us do. I
guess I do like to think about that question
by relocating it to a question about fundamental laws
of nature. And the reason I do that relocation
is already committing me on the metaphysics of causation
because in general, and we ask whether something is
a genuine part of reality kind of independent from
us or is perhaps like an illusion or maybe
a projection onto reality of some aspect of our
psychology. Um EVEN if we take it to be
a genuine part of reality, we can ask where
it's located, like how fundamental is it. So just
to help clarify that, I, I think that there
are lots of properties of material objects that they
have quite independently of us. For example, I think
that the table, that's the, the coffee table that's
next to me right now is a solid object
and, and more or less rigid. It's a rigid,
solid object. Um And I don't think that has
anything to do with me or anyone else. I
think it just is that way intrinsically independently of
how humans think about it. Um And, but even
if I'm right about that, it's not as if
solidity or rigidity, those two properties are fundamental. It's
not like quirks, you know, are solid and rigid
or not, you know, it's just not a, a
category that applies at that stage. So it's natural
to think in, in some sense, these properties of
the table are derivative of something deeper. And I
tend to favor approaches to causation that assume that
if it's part of the real furniture of the
world, it is. So in a derivative sense doesn't
make it any less real, just means it's not
fundamental now, that might not be right, but let's
run with it for a minute, right? Um Then
we can ask if it is derivative, what's it
derivative on? And to me, the most crucial ingredient
down at the foundations would be something like fundamental
loss of nature, you know, the aspects of the
real of reality that distinguish between what in a
kind of physical sense can happen and what can't
happen. Um And then we can ask, OK, well,
what about those elements of reality? Are they or
sorry? Elements of our description of reality? I should
be more careful, are they really part of reality
or are they simply something like a, a conceptual
overlay we impose on reality and there, I, I
don't know, I mean, depending on the time of
day and how much coffee I've had and what
mood I'm in, I'll sort of lean one way
or the other. Um, AND I think that some
of the most interesting recent work in metaphysics and
philosophy, science has been about this question and there's
a kind of divide between people on one side
who view themselves as heirs to David Hume and
think like no reality itself doesn't have any law
or necessity in it. Um It's rather that we
can describe it in certain ways that are useful
to us. Now, we can pick out certain claims
about reality or at least could if we knew
enough as being the laws, not because they're metaphysically
special, but because those claims are particularly useful to
us in organizing our view of the world. That's
a kind of quick overview of like one way
of thinking about um law. Um And then there
are people on the other side who think no,
no, the world really does have necessity in it.
There are lots of variations on that second view.
Um But, but I find it, I find that
a really deep question and it's not clear how
to get to the bottom of it right now.
I think the most productive work is being done
just trying to lay out those options with as
much clarity and depth as possible so that we
can get to the point where we can ask
this harder question, how would we decide between them?
But I don't think we're there yet.
I mean, I guess that if we wanted to
really complicate this question about the metaphysical status of
position to the maximum extent, I guess we could
say something like or start with something like OK,
so uh uh uh in my question, I mentioned
uh things and then I mentioned causal causal relations
between them. But even mentioning things themselves is already
starting from an assumption that there are actually things
in the world. I mean, sort of optic perspective
of the world because if you get into stuff
like there are people coming from complexity theory and
dynamical systems theory, chaos theory that I intend to
talk more about relations processes and they don't like
things, they don't really like to talk about things
or whatever I think might be and then uh
to complicate even further, we might get into stuff
like neuroscience and cognitive science and say, and physics
as well and say, but look even the things
you are referring to are not there really because
that's only what you see, what we see through
our perception. And so whatever we are referring to
that is also not part of the structure of
reality itself and that's another complication. Uh And then,
and then, I mean, there are people II, I
mean, I mentioned the people who prefer things like
relations or processes. But then on the other side,
people who prefer to talk about things, they might
say that, I mean, possibly causation is not even
part of the structure of reality itself. It's just,
it's just how we experience uh I mean, events
happening or things I interacting with, with one another.
It's just moral, uh let's say an epistemological approach
to whatever we experienced or something along those lines.
But wherever the case, I mean, it doesn't matter
if people from complexity theory or some other similar
approach or the atomist are, right? Uh uh But
uh if one or the other is right, also
the way we understand causation itself, it changes completely,
right? And so I guess that what I'm trying
to say is that when considering the metaphysical or
ontological status of causation, we could get into all
of these sorts of complications.
Yeah, I think, I think one of one of
the things that attracts me to thinking of causation
as derivative is it allows you to be flexible
in no, like I, if any time we take
something to be fundamental, the question naturally arises like,
well, which category are you putting it in? No.
Um um No, it would be, it might be
weird to say there are things that are fundamental
and there are also processes that are fundamental and
there are, you know, events that are fundamental, you
know, all together. No. Um BUT but I I'm
a kind of like, I'm hopeful that we, when
it comes to causation, we can be ecumenical and
say like, well for certain purposes, it might be
useful to think about some part of the world
as carved up into processes, not distinct things say.
Um um But you can still like, especially if
you take a broadly counterfactual approach, talk about dependence,
relations between different stages of a process just as
you can talk about like dependence, relations between something
that a thing is doing at one time and
something that some other thing is doing at another
time. Um I do think though, like your, your
comment made me like realize that there's more to
say about this reality question when it comes to
distinctions between different kinds of causes. Um Because when
we think about the world, it's not just that
we think about the world in causal terms, we
also have causal taxonomies. Um No, we think of
flammability as a distinct power from solubility, say um
or if I want to do it in terms
of processes, we think that no, when, when Susie
throws a rock at a window and Billy throws
a rock at a window, maybe they're throwing it
separate windows now and both windows break that it's
the same kind of process in each case that
led to the windows breaking. Whereas, you know, if,
if an airplane goes by and breaks the sound
barrier and the Sonic boom breaks the window. That's
a different kind of process. And that seems very
important in the sciences too. I remember, you know,
way, way back, I won't tell you how long
ago that's that secret. But when I was studying
chemistry as an undergraduate, um part of what we
had to learn when we were learning organic chemistry
is distinct reaction mechanisms. That was a basic explanatory
notion in the field, the notion of a distinct
reaction mechanism. And that's a causal notion we're thinking
about like there are chemical reactions about in the
world. A lot of particular chemical reactions gazillions of
them happening all the time. And we categorize those
causal processes, those individual discrete causal processes into types
and say like, well, all these reactions are the
same and all these reactions are different but similar
in the following way and so on. And it's
really, really important to the advancement of science that
we have an effective way of doing that like
a useful, flexible illuminating taxonomy of causal types. OK?
Is, are those distinctions real we can ask your
question? Um OR they are they somehow imposed by
us now? Like you could put it this way
from a God's eye view. Are there any distinctions
but like built in distinctions between causal types? Um
OR, or any such distinctions that are special? No,
we can draw distinctions all over the place. But
when in fact, what we do is we draw
them in very particular ways we say like, no,
this reaction is really fundamentally different from this reaction
mechanism. Um But in saying that, are we tracking
a distinction that's like out there in the world
and we're simply discovering it or are we imposing
a kind of taxonomic structure on the world? That's
another question I find really interesting. Um And I,
I think this is gonna sound wishy washy. I
think this is a theme in, in my work.
But I think somehow there's a combination somehow like
there's a lot of imposition on the world that
we do. Um But the world lends itself to
being imposed on by creatures like us in some
ways better than others.
Yeah, I think that that last bit connects to
one of the brief things I mentioned in my
previous question when I said that uh perhaps we
should think if something is just part of the
way we epistemological approach the world or part of
reality itself because, and, and that's a very, I
guess, complicated question because to, to know what the
world is about the nature of reality, we have
to approach it with some epistemological framework in mind.
But then, but then separating what is epistemology from
what is metaphysics is very, very complicated and sometimes
we as humans might get uh iii I mean,
might find ourselves uh confusing what is part of
the epistemological framework with what is reality itself.
Yeah, I think that's, that's exactly Right. And that's
a really important insight and, and going back to
your first question about like, how, how do I
approach the study of causation part of what ended
up making me a little frustrated with the old
fashioned way of like, we just amass, just generate
intuitions about cases and try to come up with
a good analysis. Is it, is it, it's kind
of blind to this point you're making no, like
you wonder like, well, why are like, like what's
the value in the analysis? Is it getting at
the the way like if we have a successful
analysis, has it revealed to us the metaphysical nature
of causation? Or is it simply revealed to us
something about our own minds and how we find
it convenient to think? And, and I think it
can be, it can be good but very difficult
to just front load that question, right? And, and
ask like, what, what kinds of epistemic and practical
needs do we have such that thinking in one
way rather than another is gonna be effective at
meeting those needs? And once we're sufficiently aware of
that, how should we rethink that metaphysics epistemology divide?
You know, 11 area that I think could use
more attention here, believe it or not, is mathematics
now, we don't think of causation is happening in
mathematics. Um But, but we do talk about explanation
and we do work with a conception of mathematics
that is structured like even the basic distinction between
what counts as an axiom of a certain branch
of mathematics versus a theorem um is, is kind
of imposing some structure on, on the subject matter.
And there too, like there, II I think one
thing that can be helpful about thinking about mathematics
is it's, it's a little more tractable. Like I,
I tend to think for ex if we go
back to the, the, the distinction between axioms and
theorems that there's nothing in metaphysical reality that draws
a distinction between axioms and theorems. Whether um or,
or, or at least not just out in metaphysical
reality. What's true is that certain claims strike us
as obvious? No. Um MAYBE so obvious that they
wouldn't become more obvious if we proved them from
other mathematical claims. And for those reasons and maybe
because they're like sufficiently powerful enough that we can
prove lots of things from them, we over time
settle on some is playing the role of axioms
now. But there's a nice example if, if that's
right of a distinction where it could be really
easy to be tempted by the metaphysical picture, like
some truths about arithmetic or about the numbers are
just metaphysically fundamental. And those are the axioms, you
don't have to go that way and, and it's
more productive, I think, to step back and ask
like, well, why, what is the notion of axiom
do for us? Why do we need it? And
then you can start reflecting that well, we need
to regulate our practice with each other of, you
know, doing mathematics, say, doing the theory of arithmetic
in a certain way. And it's helpful to have
some statements that we can all point to as
ones that, that in principle, at least should be
starting points and, and so on. And likewise, in
the case of causation, I think it's, it's useful
to think like what does structuring our conception of
the world or some portion of the world in
causal terms do for us collectively? And how, how
might getting clear about that about our own epistemic
and practical needs and the way they drive the
way we set up our thought, how could that
get us to rethink the metaphysics epistemology divide? That's
a really great um question. And I think a
really productive area for inquiry in philosophy.
Yeah. And I mean, you mentioned mathematics there and
it's very interesting because there's also this never ending
discussion about if uh the numbers, mathematics, I know
geometric structures are part of reality itself or if
mathematics uh the entire field of mathematics is just
a human invention. And we can't really attribute any
metaphysical reality to numbers and geometrical structures. And all
of that, I mean, II, I have to admit
that there are parts of it that if, if,
for example, if it's true that reality itself is
just uh some geometric structure or something like that.
Uh ME as a human, I can't understand what
that really means. I might, I mean, I might
understand the mathematics itself. I might be able to
visualize to some extent the geometric structure, but I,
I don't know.
Right.
With the real implications.
That's right. Right. Right. Right. One of the more
radical views I've come across is the view that
reality itself just is a mathematical object. And I,
I share your bafflement at that, but it's fascinating.
I mean, this is a great thing about philosophy,
you get to explore these completely wacky ideas and
as long as you do so rigorously, yeah. And
I just like one follow up to that your,
your point about just numbers in general, like, like,
or, or mathematical objects, maybe they're not part of
reality in some sense that you can kind of
zoom out and notice that this divide between metaphysics
and epistemology. Can you, you, you could have different
views about where it comes up. So I, I
might think that mathematics is entirely kind of, you
know, epistemology if you like no, that like there,
as far as the metaphysics of mathematical objects are
concerned, maybe I, I might think there's nothing to
say they're not, they're not real but uh like,
maybe they are useful fiction or, I mean, I'll
have to tell some story about what we're doing
when we do mathematics. But even if I'm a
platonist about like numbers, suppose, I think numbers really
exist independently of us and have their mathematical properties
independently of us. I still might be as, or
an epistemology about the distinction between axioms and theorems,
considering the numbers, right? That distinction, just because I'm
a realist about one part of mathematics doesn't mean
I'm a realist about everything, every part of mathematical
practice. Um, AND same so too, you know, with
causation and laws of nature and things like that,
I think.
Mhm. But uh by the way, since you mentioned
laws of nature, um what, what is the law
of nature? Exactly? Because I guess that should be
a very controversial uh thing, right? I, I mean,
of course, for example, in science, if we're talking
about physics, OK, I guess there's no big deal
in using uh a word like law there. But
if we get into something like, I mean, if
we look at it as different levels of analysis,
of course, we can have a different view of
it. But if we go with that and we
go even one step above physics, then using something
like law or law of nature already gets very,
very controversial. So what does that mean exactly in
this context of trying to figure out what the
compositional structure of reality is and also associated with
the philosophy of causation?
Right? Great question. Um I mean, my, my own
view is that the concept of love of nature
has, has a few roles to play. But, but
that we should start by distinguishing like fundamental laws
of nature and other things that we might loosely
call laws of nature and that fundamental laws of
nature are whatever it is um about reality or
perhaps about our conception of reality that draws it
a, a basic distinction between what can happen and
what can't um where the can and can't have
to be understood in an appropriately kind of physical
sense. No. Um uh Sometimes philosophers talk about what's
metaphysically possible. No. And, and they know the imagination
runs wild, but when we're talking about what's physically
possible, we can strain ourselves. Um And, and I
think that that so understood that the notion is
tied to things in our ordinary experience. Now, if
I have like here's my phone, for example, if
I let it go, you know, it's gonna fall
onto my lap. Um And it's not just that
it's going to, but in some sense, it has
to given that there's nothing supported, supporting it, you
know, other kinds of behavior would be impossible. So
we recognize this distinction in a kind of in
coate way just all the time in our ordinary
life when we think, you know, there, there are
things that could happen and things that couldn't. Um
And fundamentally in, in the, it, maybe I should
be careful about over using the word fundamentally. But
at bottom, I think we want a notion of
law of nature to draw that kind of distinction.
Um And then the um the, the like astonishing
ambition of modern physics is to articulate the structure
of what's possible in this incredibly mathematically elegant fashion.
No. And uh that physicists like um like uh
draw attention to when they talk about things like
Newton's laws which uh they didn't quite work or
Maxwell's equations or the shorting and so on. Um
But I think, I think that there's a way
of, of there's another way in and here I'm
again, inspired by the work of Jim Woodward. Uh
TO think that there, there are claims about the
world that don't have that status, but that are
still really important to, to us. Jim calls them
highly invariant generalizations. So, so there might be some
generalization that's true about the world and would have
remained true under a wide range of different circumstances.
Um So chemistry is chock full of things like
this like, you know, um there's a generalization that
if you take a hydrocarbon and, and mix it
with oxygen and add enough energy, you'll get combustion,
you know. Um BUT that's not a law of
nature in the physicist sense there, they're interfering conditions
that could make it not happen. It's, it's sort
of probabilistic, it's not absolutely guaranteed to happen, you
know, like you could have just a weird way
in which the hydrocarbons and oxygen are configured relative
to each other where they just happen, not to
be able to react. Um But it's still, it's
a fairly robust generalization um invariant under a wide
range of circumstances. And there's a way you could
think of what the physicists are after as the
most invariant generalizations. No, the maximally invariant ones, the
ones where you don't have to worry about anything
interfering because the law itself is so comprehensive that
it covers anything that could qualify as an interference.
Um So I, I tend to think like in,
in the history of philosophy, science, I think there,
there was an overemphasis on laws of nature as
as um kind of showing up in the same
way across different disciplines. You saw this in Carl
Hempel um deductive nomology kind of explanation where the
notion of law of nature was central there. But
he didn't really distinguish between the laws as they
show up in fundamental physics and quote unquote laws
where I would think with Woodward Ie highly invariant,
you know, generalizations that show up in, in other
um disciplines. Um But if, if we um again,
if we go back and, and ask like, well,
what's the core distinction we're after? I think it's
really the distinction between what in a physical sense
can happen and what can't happen. And then other
distinctions like among things that can happen, there may
also be distinction between how likely they are in
an objective sense. This is where we start getting
into probabilistic laws,
right? So, uh I, I think that perhaps we
have time just for one more question. So let
me ask you this, then that is something we
haven't got into yet. At least not very much.
So, is the causal structure of a process intrinsic
to it?
Oh Right. Yeah. So I used to think that
the answer is yes, that, that was a defining
feature of what we meant by a causal process.
Um And now I think um partly from thinking
seriously about processes in the social world that um
that the answer is, is no, not in general.
Um So, so why should we give a no
answer? Well, let me think if I can. So
suppose we're suppose the process we're considering is a
financial transaction. So an exchange of money for goods
or services and, and we think it's a causal
structure, like it's not just that Susie handed over
some paper and then, you know, like took a
cup of coffee, like one led to the other,
like there's a genuine process there. Um Now you
could analyze that process at the level of physics,
like there's just like two co some complicated physical
system, Susie, the barista, the machinery, you know, that
generates the coffee and they're all sort of interacting
in a way that begins with her, making certain
motions and ends with her like making certain motions.
But, but you can also describe that process in
a more illuminating way as an economic transaction. And,
and I don't think that's kind of incidental, I
think like we are, you know, describing it correctly
when we say like she, you know, uh paying
the, the uh barista caused the barista to give
her some coffee. OK. Um But now if we
just ask, step back and ask like, well, what,
what makes something count as paying? No, it has
to be a transfer of money. What makes something
count as money? Well, it's not what's intrinsic there.
No, like in fact, what makes something count as
money is complicated? It has something to do with
a whole network of common expectations about how certain,
you know, bits of paper or coin or, or
you know, data in a in a bank somewhere
is to be used. Um But at any rate,
what what makes that causal process can't like count
as a financial transaction is not intrinsic to it.
And yet I think it's being a financial transaction
is part of it's like, like that's essential to
its causal structure. Um So, so really simple thought,
which is like if I have a causal process
and I simply duplicate it perfectly intrinsically somewhere else,
then it'll still be the an instance of the
same causal process that that can't be right? I
don't think. Um BUT that said, I think it
is part of the way we think about causal
processes that, that over a wide range of circumstances,
duplicates of them will share their causal characteristics. So
in a normal economy another transaction that looked like
a bit of behavior that looked just like that
between Susie and the barista would still count as
a financial transaction even though if we like plucked
it out and I don't know, had, had a
perfect duplicate of this process happening out in space,
you know, with nothing around, it wouldn't be a
financial transaction there. It would be like two very
perplexed short lived beings, you know, doing some motions,
you know, um that's OK. As long as like
in a relevant set of circumstances, duplicating the process
duplicates its causal structure too. And that I think
is the crucial um idea I and if we
go back to the idea that thinking about the
world in causal terms is highly functional for us,
well, it kind of makes sense that we'd want
a way of thinking about processes causally structured processes
that allows us to acquaint ourselves with them in
some circumstances and having so acquainted ourselves with them,
then port those processes that kind of process like
over into other circumstances and still think about it
in the same causal way. And that doesn't require
something as strong as like a bold like intrinsic,
this thesis which I is what I used to
think, but it it requires a kind of softer,
you know, variant on that I think.
Mhm
And I think the structure is almost intrinsic. Yeah.
And, and I guess that and this is not
a comment on the, exactly the question I asked
before. But uh the example you gave of the
financial transaction, buying a cup of coffee, for example,
I guess that uh it's a very good illustrative
example of uh uh the idea that in this
particular case, understanding what causes, for example, that particular
behavior in that context. I mean, o of course,
perhaps it would be a way, I don't know
how to describe it just in purely physical terms,
but I it uh I mean, at least from
the point of view of a human and I
mean, that's the point of view we have to
work with uh not adding the psychological and the
cultural context to it is not uh as informative.
Uh I, I mean, we need to have that
context for it to be more informative than just
trying to describe things in terms of, I don't
know, anthems or molecules or something like that,
right? That seems right to me and, and, and
you could generalize that and say there, there's obviously
some deep value for us as humans to having
multiple ways to describe different, you know what? Well,
I should say one in the same part of
reality we're looking at now. Um And, and here,
there's controversy here, like as, as you know, like
you could get yourself into a frame of mind
where you think like, well, the only thing that's
real is physics and everything else is a kind
of, you know, projection of human epistemic interests onto
the world.
Yeah. Or, or the only thing that's really geometric
structure.
Yes. That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Even better. Um,
um, AND I, I think it's hard to sort
out, you know, whether that could be right. I
mean, one thing that's puzzling about that if, is,
if you, if you, if you remove too much
from your conception of reality, do you still have
the human element that's supposed to explain why you
were misled into thinking that, that the other stuff
was there in the first place? No. Um Like
if like if I really strictly say the only
thing that's real is what physics talks about, well,
physics doesn't talk about humans and their epistemological and
practical needs. So those aren't real. So what kind
of explanation is it to say? Like we only
think that chemistry is real because of our human
practical and epistemic needs or, or sociology or what
or whatever? Um Yeah, II, I tend to like,
start feeling vertigo when I encounter questions like that
and think like, well, let's go back and just
like, like slow down and probe like again, what
does it do for us to have multiple levels
at which we can describe or multiple time and
length scales at which we can describe a phenomenon,
there's some kind of illumination or insight we get.
And I, and I should say this is maybe
AAA good places to um no for the conversation
to lead. No. Um BEHIND all this interesting causation
and laws of nature and related concepts, I think
is an interesting explanation. No, that is the kind
of thing we're after when we say we don't
merely want a catalog of facts about the world,
but we want insight and understanding and, and we
think learning about what causes, what gives us that
we think, learning about laws of nature gives us
that. But it, it in a way if we
want to like really probe the question, why is
it good for us humans to think of the
world in causal terms? A prior question might be,
why is it good for us to, to ask
not only like what, where when questions but why
questions?
Yeah. OK, great. So look, I'm getting mindful of
your time. So perhaps that's a good point to
wrap up the interview on. So uh just before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Oh Phil papers.org is probably the best place because
my website is like out of date. Um THOUGH
though one of my projects, once I get myself
organized is is to, to change that. Yeah, the
film papers.org is like the ideal location.
OK, great. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description box of the interview and uh nev
thank you so much again for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been really fun.
Katie. Thank you, Ricardo Wonder. Wonderful, wonderful questions. Really
enjoyed talking with you.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you like what I'm doing, please
do not forget to share like, subscribe, comment and
to keep the channel sustainable. Please consider supporting it
on Patreon or paypal. You can find the links
in the description box of the interview. The show
is brought to you by N Lights learning and
development. Then differently check their website at N lights.com.
I would also like to give a huge thank
you to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Perga
Larson, Jerry Mull Lawrence Frederick Sune Bernard. So all
of Alex Adam Kessel Matthew Winten beg are no
W Tim Hollows, Erica J Connors Philip for Connolly.
Then the mere Robert winger ruin, Mark Nevs Colin
Holbrook, Simon Columbus, Phil Kavanagh, Mikel. Stormer Samuel Andre
Francis for the Agns Fergal K and Hale Herzog
and Hes Mark S Wilson JP Charlotte Adam Pas
Nele Bach Guy Madison, Gary G Almansa Zal Adrian
Bunin, Jean Barbo Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Bruner
Douglas Fra Franco BTO Lotti Gabriel Cortez, Orlik Scott
Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Wan Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino Luke Lovas, Theo Williams
and Peter Walla and David Williams Di Costa Anton
Erickson Charles More Shower, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry D Lee Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael Bailey,
then Sperber, Robert Grassy, Zor and Jeff. Mcmahon, Jake
Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Campbell Thomas Dubner, Luke Neeson,
Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin GALT, Jessica Nowicki Linda
Brandon, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bens Leman, George Katis, Valentin
Steinman, Per Rawles, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Hubert, Liam
Donnay Bi Ma Ma Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular and I
Herner, a special thanks to my producers is our
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Ween, Bernard, Ni Fortis Dixon,
Benedikt Mueller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin. Jean
Carlo, Mon Negro, Al Ortiz, and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Mafi Lavender as you could
and Bogdan K I thank you for all.